make the goal selectable (#2)
4383/governance: goals/selected/remove-eventlet.rst

==============================
Remove Eventlet from OpenStack
==============================

OpenStack is built on the top of asynchronous mechanisms.
Many Openstack deliverables use the Eventlet library to obtain asynchronous

> those asynchronous mechanismes. Problem, Eventlet lake of active maintainers
> and that led that library to a point where Eventlet is broken at each new
> CPython versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those asynchronous mechanismes. The problem is that Eventlet lacks active maintainers
and that has led the library to a point where Eventlet is broken with each new
CPython version.
```

> Asyncio based solutions (awaitlet, aiohttp, etc) offers a flexible, perennial,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asyncio based solutions (awaitlet, aiohttp, etc) offer flexible, perennial,
```

and modern alteratives to Eventlet. Since the Eventlet Asyncio hub was
released, allowing Eventlet and Asyncio to be ran into the same process, the

> community has encouraged the usage of those alternatives and the deprecation

Reviewer: suggest: Eventlet community

of any existing code still using Eventlet.

Champion
========

- Hervé Beraud <hberaud@redhat.com> (hberaud)

Gerrit Topic
============

To facilitate tracking, commits related to this goal should use the
gerrit topic::

  eventlet-removal

> A new sub-task in middle term [1]_ or long term [2]_ stories will be created

Reviewer: s/middle/short

or maybe "medium"

to track any related advancement by deliverable.

Completion Criteria
===================

#. Get the oslo deliverables doing networkIO providing Asyncio based drivers

>    and backends (oslo.cache, oslo.messaging, oslo.db, etc);

Reviewer: is it possible to enumerate "etc" here? 

IIRC you had already compiled a list..

#. Get libraries like OpenStackSDK migrated;

> #. Get a reference user project elected;

Reviewer: What does this mean?

Author: That was suggested by Pete, to check the Oslo new "async" drivers/backends in a chosen Openstack deliverable:
https://review.opendev.org/c/openstack/governance/+/902585/comment/80568a67_d1db7f48/

I can update that sentence to better explain that point.

> #. Get non actively maintained deliverables retired;

Reviewer: s/deliverables/OpenStack deliverables

#. Get all other OpenStack deliverables relying on Eventlet migrated;
#. Get usage of Eventlet in oslo deliverables removed;
#. Get Eventlet retired from OpenStack;

> #. Get Eventlet abandoned or bequeath to someone else.

Reviewer: the last point wouldn't be necessary in this goal..

References
==========

The main reference guide could be found in [3]_. This guide provides
information about how to migrate from Eventlet to the available alternatives.

> As commented in the first section, if the alternative selected to migrate

Reviewer: s/commented/noted

* the server pattern: [6]_;
* the client pattern: [7]_;
* the dispatch pattern: [8]_.

Replacing Eventlet usage requires more than just a drop-in replacement. The
available alternatives are different and will require rethinking the way each
module is designed in a way that precludes a blind or programmatic
substitution.

As commented in the OpenStack mailing list [9]_, the migration is based on the
freedom of decision-making. Some Openstack deliverables represent thousand of
line code. Asyncio is by nature invasive. Using Asyncio everywhere would
require to rewrite entirely the deliverables. For this reason we created
Awaitlet [10]_ which could be used to introduce usage of Asyncio while
limiting its impact on the existing code.

Current State / Anticipated Impact
==================================

Progress is maintained on the public tracker links below:
* short term actions (done): [11]_
* middle term actions: [1]_
* long term actions: [2]_

History of this goal can be found here [12]_

Links
=====

.. [1] https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSPRH-5960
.. [2] https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSPRH-5980
.. [3] https://eventlet.readthedocs.io/en/latest/asyncio/migration.html

> .. [4] 

Author: All these links depends on patches that are not yet merged and so the documentation page does not yet exists. I'll append them when the eventlet PRs will be merged

==============================
Remove Eventlet from OpenStack
==============================

OpenStack is built on the top of asynchronous mechanisms.
Many Openstack deliverables use the Eventlet library to obtain asynchronous

> those asynchronous mechanismes. The problem is that Eventlet lacks of active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those asynchronous mechanisms. The problem is that Eventlet lacks of active
```

typo

maintainers and that has led the library to a point where Eventlet is broken

> with each new CPython versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with each new CPython version.
```
typo

Asyncio based solutions (awaitlet, aiohttp, etc) offer flexible, perennial,
and modern alteratives to Eventlet. Since the Eventlet Asyncio hub was

> released, allowing Eventlet and Asyncio to be ran into the same process, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
released, allowing Eventlet and Asyncio to be run within the same process, the
```

grammar

Eventlet community has encouraged the usage of those alternatives and the
deprecation of any existing code still using Eventlet.

Champion
========

- Hervé Beraud <hberaud@redhat.com> (hberaud)

Gerrit Topic
============

To facilitate tracking, commits related to this goal should use the
gerrit topic::

  eventlet-removal

A new sub-task in short term [1]_ or long term [2]_ stories will be created
to track any related advancement by deliverable.

Completion Criteria
===================

> #. (2025-1 or 2025-2) Get the oslo deliverables doing networkIO providing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. (2025.1 or 2025.2) Get the oslo deliverables doing networkIO providing
```

   Asyncio based drivers and backends:
   - oslo.cache;
   - oslo.messaging;
   - oslo.db;
   - etcd3gw;
   - oslo.metrics;
#. (2025-1) Get libraries like OpenStackSDK migrated;
#. (2025-2) Get an Openstack deliverable as reference user project elected to
   test Oslo changes related to new Asyncio based drivers;
#. (2025-2) Get non actively maintained Openstack deliverables retired;
#. (2026-2) Get all other OpenStack deliverables relying on Eventlet migrated;
#. (2027-1) Get usage of Eventlet in oslo deliverables removed;

> #. (2027-2) Get Eventlet retired from OpenStack;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. (2025.1) Get libraries like OpenStackSDK migrated;
#. (2025.2) Get an OpenStack deliverable as reference user project selected to
   test Oslo changes related to new Asyncio based drivers;
#. (2025.2) Get non actively maintained OpenStack deliverables retired;
#. (2026.2) Get all other OpenStack deliverables relying on Eventlet migrated;
#. (2027.1) Get usage of Eventlet in oslo deliverables removed;
#. (2027.2) Get Eventlet retired from OpenStack;
```

information about how to migrate from Eventlet to the available alternatives.
As notes in the first section, if the alternative selected to migrate
a deliverable is based on Asyncio, then the Asyncio hub should be enabled
first. To do so, set the ``EVENTLET_HUB`` environment variable to ``asyncio``
before starting your Eventlet based deliverable. We created this new
Eventlet hub to make Eventlet and Asyncio interoperable.

From this same link, there is also a reference to identify alternatives for
an existing snippet of code. This identification is based on table of
correspondences [4]_ which aim to put solution in the front of the main Eventlet
patterns [5]_.

This guide also provide some migration examples for those patterns:

* the server pattern: [6]_;
* the client pattern: [7]_;
* the dispatch pattern: [8]_.

Replacing Eventlet usage requires more than just a drop-in replacement. The
available alternatives are different and will require rethinking the way each
module is designed in a way that precludes a blind or programmatic
substitution.

As commented in the OpenStack mailing list [9]_, the migration is based on the

> freedom of decision-making. Some Openstack deliverables represent thousand of
> line code. Asyncio is by nature invasive. Using Asyncio everywhere would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
freedom of decision-making. Some Openstack deliverables represent thousands of
lines of code. Asyncio is by nature invasive. Using Asyncio everywhere would
```

> require to rewrite entirely the deliverables. For this reason we created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
require to rewrite the deliverables entirely. For this reason we created
```

Awaitlet [10]_ which could be used to introduce usage of Asyncio while
limiting its impact on the existing code.

Current State / Anticipated Impact
==================================

Progress is maintained on the public tracker links below:
* short term actions (done): [11]_
* middle term actions: [1]_

> * long term actions: [2]_

Reviewer: Unfortunately, I feel the community wouldn't take to using Red Hat Jira as a tracker for this work; wiki.openstack.org or etherpad.opendev.org may be good alternatives if this doesn't fit traditional tools like Launchpad or OpenDev Storyboard. 

This can be something you can delegate the Pop Up team to track though.. but, early heads up that when we post this patch to gerrit, this will invite some discussion

Author: No problem about your early warning, you are right to clarify this.
My problem is that I've to track all the things related to this migration into jira, so doing another tracking over the upstream tools duplicate the workload and the bureaucracy stuff.

If you think is it possible to delegate that synchronization tracking to the pop up team, then I won't say no :)

I might refactor that document to only speak about the upstream tools (wiki or etherpad) and perhaps we could discuss the jira sync only into the internal discussions of the pop up team, thoughts?
Going this way would reduce the noise around the discussion for goal status update (proposed to selected).
